The Module system of JFreeReport

1. Introduction

Since version 0.8.4 most of the functionality has been removed from
the hardcoded core and was relocated into separated modules. A module
contains of a Module descriptor and one or more packages of ordinary
java classes.

Modules are used to cleanly separate independent functionality and to
create a controlled way of initializing the various subsystems of
JFreeReport.

The architecture will make sure, that modules are configured and
initialized in the order of their dependency, so that a module implementor
can be sure that all dependent modules are already initialized.

All modules contain a version numbers. The package manager will verify
the versions of all required modules during the boot process and will
deny to load the module if the version does not fit the requirements.

2. The Boot process

Modules are loaded during the boot process of JFreeReport. The Package
manager is responsible to load the modules and to verify the availability
of all required modules.

Booting is done by calling "JFreeReportBoot.getInstance().start()".

If the boot code was not called manually by the user code, the boot is
started before the report configuration or a component using this
configuration is used for the first time. This automated boot process
cannot guarantee that all subsystems are initialized in the correct order.

During the boot process, all known modules will be loaded and their
dependencies are resolved. If a required module could not be loaded or
the dependencies for that module could not be fully resolved, the loading
for this and all modules depending on this module will fail. Unrelated
modules are not affected by such an failure.

User modules which should be loaded during the boottime may be specified
using the system property "org.pentaho.reporting.engine.classic.core.boot.Modules". This property
expects a comma separated list of classnames, all classes must implement
the Module interface.

User defined modules may also be added by referencing their Module class
under the name space "org.pentaho.reporting.engine.classic.core.userdefined.modules". A module
'Foobar' with the Module implementation named 'org.jfree.example.FoobarModule'
would be picked up by the system using the configuration key

  org.pentaho.reporting.engine.classic.core.userdefined.modules.Foobar.Module=org.jfree.example.FoobarModule

Modules may also be added manually by using the PackageManager.

3. Deploying modules

Modules are deployed by including them in the classpath of the application
and inserting them into the boot process, either by specifying their name
in the systemproperty or by loading them manually.

The module inserts itself into the core classes during the initialzation
phase.

4. Available Modules in the base project

4.1. XML Parser Modules

These modules contain support for parsing XML report definitions. If
your application defines the reports using the API, you can safely remove
the packages from the target system.

4.1.1 xml-parser-base (*-parser-base.jar)

This module provides a set of base classes used by all parser modules.
It is required by all parser modules.

This package requires XML parser classes to be present on the classpath.
The default distribution uses GNUJaxp as parser (contained in "gnujaxp.jar").

4.1.2 ext-xml-parser (*-parser-ext.jar)

The module provides support for the extended xml report description for
JFreeReport. This module requires the xml-parser-base to be present.

The DTD used for this parser can be found in the module package as file
"org/pentaho/reporting/engine/classic/core/modules/parser/ext/resources/extparser.dtd" and is
also downloadable from "http://jfreereport.sourceforge.net/extreport-085.dtd".

4.1.3 simple-xml-parser (*-parser-simple.jar)

This module provides support for the simple xml report definition format
of JFreeReport. This module also required the xml-parser-base to be present.

The DTD used for this parser can be found in the module package as file
"org/pentaho/reporting/engine/classic/core/modules/parser/simple/resources/parser.dtd" and is
also downloadable from "http://jfreereport.sourceforge.net/report-085.dtd".

4.1.4 report-writer (*-parser-extwriter.jar)

This module provides support for writing a report definition from a given
JFreeReport object. In most cases it is not required in a production system.
This module also required the xml-parser-base to be present.

The generated report definition will fit the extended report definition
format.


4.2 Output target modules

These modules provide means to print or export the reports into several
formats, like PDF, PlainText, HTML or Excel tables.

JFreeReport knows three kinds of output targets:

The simplest way of exporting reports is provided by the raw targets
(csv-raw and xml-raw). These targets just dump the report contents into the
output stream without any preprocessing of the report contents.

The pageable output targets process the reports to fit on one or more
pages. The report content will be paginated and pagebreaks will be inserted
if necessary. All paper oriented output targets (like Printing and PDF export)
prefer this kind of output.

The last output possibility is the table style output. This export type
will try to create a table for the content and will print the report contents
into this table. All table targets share the limitation, that no overlapping
cells are allowed. The Excel and HTML output are examples for this export
type.

4.2.1 output-csv

This module contains support for exporting the datarow of reports into
CSV files. Elements defined in the report are ignored and the raw data
from the DataRow is written to the output stream.

4.2.2 output-xml

This module contains support for exporting the elements of an report into
xml files. The elements are printing in the order of definition, but no
layouting is done.

This target was an educational example to show how to write an output target.
It is not suitable nor intendet to be used for production systems.

4.2.3 output-support-itext

This module provides base services for all iText related output targets,
like the PDF pageable target or the RTF target. This module manages the
font definitions of the iText library and is able to search for fonts
in the system specific font directories.

This package depends on the config-store modules, as the font information
will be cached for faster startup times.

The module requires the external library iText in version 1.00 to be
present in the classpath.

4.2.4 output-support-pagelayout

This module contains the control code for the common pagelayouter. This
code is responsible for translating report events into output events and
is the base of all layout dependent output targets.

4.2.5 output-meta

This module contains the base classes for the meta elements. These classes
hold the layouted content until the content creator performs the final
output.

4.2.6 Pageable output targets

4.2.6.1 output-pageable-base

This module contains common base classes for all pageable output targets.
It is required by all pageable targets and by the preview components.

It depends on the output-support-pageable module and the output-meta
module and will not work without them.

4.2.6.2 output-pageable-graphics

The Graphics2D support module enables JFreeReport to output the report
content to an java.awt.Graphics2D object. The preview components and the
printing depends on it. You will also need this module, if you want to
export your reports into an java.awt.Image.

This module requires the pageable export base for work.

4.2.6.3 output-pageable-pdf

This module provides support to generate PDF content using the iText
library. iText supports the generation of PDF documents supporting the
PDF specification version 1.2 to 1.5.

This module will not work, if the iText support or the pageable-export-base
modules are missing.

4.2.6.4 output-pageable-plaintext

The plaintext export can be used to generate text content from an report.
This output target has several limitations:

The plain text target is a special export target. Due to the limitation of
the plain text format, the report need to be carefully prepared for that
format.

If the exported report contains rather small elements, then running the
reporting may produce this exception. The elements in the report must be
greater or equal to the specified font size on the plaintext output target.

The plain text output target support either 6 LPI or 10 LPI, so all elements
must be either at least 12 points (for 6 LPI = 6 lines per inch / 72 dots
per inch) or 7.2 points heigh. In most cases the width is not the killer,
as the system would simply remove all non-displayable characters on that
line.

The plain text target is intended to be used in conjunction with matrix
printers, if just want to get parsable (or editable) text, you should
have a look at the html target.

Images and shapes are not supported right now.

In conjunction with Epson or IBM printers, it is possible to support some
limited text formating capabilities (like bold, italic or underlined).

Most users searching an way to edit the generated report contents after
the generation, should have a look at the HTML export. The HTML target is
not as complicated to feed as this one and supports a greater range of
text formating options.

The plaintext export depends on the pageable base classes, of course.

4.2.7 Table based output targets

4.2.7.1 output-table-base

This module contains all base classes required for the table export.
It depends on the output-support-pageable module.

4.2.7.2 output-table-csv

The CSV table export layouts the report content into a tablegrid. The
generated table is printed into the CSV file. One row of the table
results in a line in the csv file, every cell of the table will result
in a value in the file. Cell- or Row-Spanning is not supported due to
the limitations of the export format.

This module depends on the "output-table-base".

4.2.7.3 output-table-html

The HTML taget supports the generation of XHTML1.0 or HTML4.01 content.
Images will be included in the generated content, depending on the selected
export type.

The stream export will include images only if the image was loaded from
an external file or http resource or has been specified using an
URLImageContainer.

The directory and zip export will include all images and provide an option
to copy all image content into the target files or directory.

The module will not work, if the "output-table-base" module is missing.

4.2.7.4 output-table-html

This target is barely usable now. The RTF content creation does not yet
support images. All generated content is held in memory and printed when
the reporting finishes. This binds the report content to the size of the
available memory.

The module requires the "output-support-itext" and the "output-table-base"
to be present.

4.2.7.5 output-table-excel

The excel export writes the report content into a MS-Office Excel file.
The generated file will be compatible with Excel 97/2000.

This target does not support the generation of images yet.

The Apache POI library version 2.0-pre3 or higher must be present in the
classpath as well as the "table-export-base" module.

4.2.7.5 output-table-rtf

The RichTextFormat export writes the report content into a RTF file.
The file will contain a large table containing all content.

iText and the output-support-itext module must be present to use this
export method.

4.3 GUI classes

4.3.1 gui-base

This module contains base components used by most other gui classes and
(of course) the preview components. You will need this module, if you
want to preview the report. All export guis will plug into this module
to provide access to their functionality.

The module depends on the "pageable-export-base" and the
"graphics2d-pageable-export".

4.3.2 gui-csv

Provides a gui for the raw and table export into CSV files. Both export
modules and the preview-base classes must be present.

4.3.3 gui-html

Provides a gui for the HTML export. The html export module and the
preview-base classes must be present.

4.3.4 gui-pdf

Provides a gui for the PDF export. The pdf-pageable-export module and the
preview-base-module must be activated to make this module work.

4.3.5 gui-plaintext

Provides a gui for the plaintext export. This module requires the
plaintext-pageable-export and the preview-base classes to be present.

4.3.6 gui-print

Provides support for the Java 1.2 printing API. The preview-base classes
must be present.

4.3.7 gui-xls

Provides a gui for the HTML export. The html export module and the
preview-base classes must be present.

4.3.8 gui-config

This module contains an editor to create jfreereport.properties files, which
can be used to provide a local configuration for JFreeReport. The file
need to be located in the root of the classpath.

The editor list all available report settings and contains help texts for
each property.

The preview-base must be present in the system to make this editor work.

4.3.9 gui-converter

The report converter can be used to convert reports from the simple report
definition format or from older JFreeReport versions to the new name space
of JFreeReport 0.8.4.

Please make sure you've read the "migration.txt" before starting to convert
older reports.

This module requires all parser modules to be present and will also use
the preview-base module.

4.4 Other modules

4.4.1 misc-beanshell

The bean-shell module provides support for the BSHExpression, which is
an simple way of adding small scripts to the xml report definitions.

Users which define their reports using the API will be faster when
implementing the expressions as own classes.

This requires the beanshell classes (contained in "bsh-2.0b6.jar") to be
present in the classpath.

4.4.2 misc-referencedoc

This module provides a reference documentation for the used object
descriptions of the extended parser. Starting the ReferenceDocGenerator
will place the generated files into your home directory.

This module depends on the parser-ext, the output-pageable-pdf and the
output-table-html modules.

4.4.3 misc-tablemodel

The classes contained in this module contain utility methods to ease the
handling of tablemodels. The ResultSetTableModelFactory provides a simple
way of creating tablemodels from java.sql.ResultSet objects. The
TableModelInfo class will print some debugging info on tablemodels and can
be used to verify the correctness of an tablemodel implementation.

The module has no external dependencies.

4.4.4 misc-configstore-base

The config store is used to store property files in a location independent
way. This module contains base classes for the config store, and depends
on no other modules.

4.4.5 misc-configstore-filesystem

The filesystem config store provides a method to write the stored property
files into a repository located in the local filesystem.

This module will not work without the "misc-configstore-base".

4.4.6 misc-bsf

The bean-scripting framework module provides support for scripting using one
of the supported languages of the Apache-BeanScripting framework. This is
an simple way of adding small scripts to the xml report definitions.

Users which define their reports using the API will be faster when
implementing the expressions as own classes.

This requires the bean scripting framework classes (contained in
"bsf-2.3.0.jar") to be present in the classpath.

4.4.7 misc-datafactory

Contains Datafactory-implementations for JDBC-Datasources and another
implementation for Java-Datasources using the reflection API to call
parametrizable methods which build TableModels for the reporting.